
AN AXIOM ENVIRONMENT FOR EMACS
==============================

This software is intended to make it easier to work with, and
understand, the Axiom, OpenAxiom and FriCAS computer algebra systems.
It implements four different major modes for the Emacs text editor:

  1. axiom-process-mode: for interaction with a running Axiom process.

  2. axiom-help-mode: for displaying help information about the Axiom
     system.
  
  3. axiom-input-mode: for editing a .input (Axiom script) file.

  4. axiom-spad-mode: for editing Axiom library code written in the
     SPAD language.

The main features of these modes (so far) are syntax highlighting to
display package, domain & category names (and their abbreviations) in
distinct colours, and to give quick access to popup buffers displaying
summary information about these types and their operations.  The
syntax highlighting feature allows us to see at a glance which
``level'' of the type system we are concerned with (domains or
categories), and the popup buffer feature allows us to examine (and
re-examine) these types without interupting our workflow
(i.e. interaction in the Axiom REPL).  Hint: to make a popup help
buffer go away, press ``q'', emacs's window configuration will be
restored to what it was before the help window appeared and the help
buffer will be buried in the buffer list.

There is also a simple org-babel Axiom extension available.  This
integrates the axiom-environment into org-mode, allowing a literate
development/presentation style with easy publishing to HTML, PDF, etc.


INSTALLATION
============

To install the software the easiest thing to do is to clone the
mercurial repository (hosted at bitbucket.org) into your directory of
choice:

  cd /my/directory/of/choice

  hg clone http://bitbucket.org/pdo/axiom-environment

then add the following line to your .emacs file:

  (load-file "/my/directory/of/choice/axiom-environment/axiom.el")

This will load the environment, automatically putting .spad and .input
files into ``Axiom SPAD'' and ``Axiom Input'' mode, respectively, and
giving access to an ``Axiom'' menu in these modes.

Also available is the ``Axiom Selector'' function, to give quick
access to Axiom buffers.  This is most useful when bound to a key
sequence that is accessible from any buffer.  For example

  (global-set-key (kbd "C-c a") 'axiom-selector)

in your .emacs file will do nicely.  Then you can do `C-c a ?' to
bring up a summary of selector commands.  Highlights include `C-c a r'
to switch to the Axiom REPL buffer, and 'C-c a b' to bring up a buffer
listing all available Axiom buffers and allowing you to select one to
switch to, or display in another window.  Type `?' or the usual `C-h
m' to bring up a summary of Axiom Buffer Menu mode's commands.

To exercise more control over how exactly the environment is setup,
please see the comments at the start of the ``axiom.el'' file.

To start an interactive Axiom session do:

  M-x run-axiom

Note that by default this will attempt to start the FriCAS program
(with command "fricas -nosman"), but that this can be changed using an
Emacs customization variable.  In fact many customization variables
exist, for different aspects of the environment, under the ``Axiom''
customization group.  Likely candidates you will want to change
include:-

  axiom-process-program
  axiom-process-spad-source-dirs

An easy way of managing arbitrary collections of customization
variables is available via the Emacs ``theme'' mechanism.  Example
themes showing how to setup the environment to work with FriCAS or
OpenAxiom on SBCL, and Axiom on GCL, are included in the ``themes''
subdirectory of this distribution.


REQUIREMENTS
============

Please note that development of this software started with Emacs 24.2
and it is quite likely that it won't work with earlier versions.


BUGS
====

Testing so far has been with Axiom, OpenAxiom and FriCAS running on
MacOSX (the latter two built with SBCL).  It should of course run on
other OSes too.

It should be noted that most development work is done with FriCAS, so
this is likely to give the least problematic user experience.

Please send bug reports to:

  Paul Onions <paul.onions@acm.org>

or click on the issue tracker tab at:

  http://bitbucket.org/pdo/axiom-environment/

and enter the details there.

--
Paul Onions
1 August 2015
